From: AAAI Technical Report FS-00-04. Compilation copyright © 2000, AAAI (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Towards Integrating Plot and Character for Interactive Drama
Michael Mateas

Andrew Stern

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh PA 15213
michaelm@cs.cmu.edu

www.interactivestory.net
andrew@interactivestory.net

Introduction
Interactive drama concerns itself with building
dramatically interesting virtual worlds inhabited by
computer-controlled characters, within which the user
(hereafter referred to as the player) experiences a story
from a first person perspective (Bates 1992). Over the past
decade there has been a fair amount of research into
believable agents, that is, autonomous characters
exhibiting rich personalities, emotions, and social
interactions (Mateas 1997; Bates, Loyall and Reilly 1992;
Blumberg 1996; Hayes-Roth, van Gent and Huber 1997;
Lester and Stone 1997; Stern, Frank, and Resner 1998).
There has been comparatively little work, however,
exploring how the local, reactive behavior of believable
agents can be integrated with the more global,
deliberative nature of a story plot, so as to build
interactive, dramatic worlds (Weyrauch 1997; Blumberg
and Galyean 1995). The authors are currently engaged in
a two to three year collaboration to build an interactive
story world integrating believable agents and interactive
plot. This paper provides a brief description of the project
goals and design requirements, discusses the problem of
autonomy in the context of story-based believable agents,
and finally describes an architecture that uses the
dramatic beat as a structural principle to integrate plot and
character.

Design requirements
The design requirements for the project are divided into
two categories: project requirements and story
requirements.

Project requirements
The project requirements are the overarching goals for the
project, independent of the particular interactive story
expressed within the system.
Artistically complete. The player should have a
complete, artistically whole experience. The system
should not be a piece of interactive drama technology
without a finished story, nor only a fragment of a story.

The experience should stand on its own as a piece of art,
independent of any technical innovations made by the
project.
Animated characters. The characters will be represented
as real-time animated figures that can emote, have
personality and can speak.
Interface. The player will experience the world from a
first-person 3D perspective. The viewpoint is controlled
with the keyboard and mouse. The perspective may
occasionally automatically shift to a third-person
perspective to show action that is difficult to show from
first-person.
Dialog. Dialog will be the primary mechanism by which a
player interacts with characters and influences how the
story unfolds. To achieve dialog, the player types out text
that is visible on screen; the computer characters' dialog is
spoken speech with simultaneously displayed text. The
conversation discourse is real-time; that is, if the player is
typing, it is as if they are speaking those words in
(pseudo) real-time. The system should be very robust
when responding to inappropriate and unintelligible input.
Although the characters' dialog and "intelligence" are
narrowly focused around the topic of the story, the
characters have a large variety of responses to off-thewall remarks from the player. (For example, if the player
says "Do you ever go camping?", the characters can
respond with "We hate the outdoors".)
Interactivity and plot. The player's actions should have a
significant influence on what events occur in the plot,
which are left out, and how the story ends. The plot
should be generative enough that it supports replayability.
Only after playing the experience 6 or 7 times should the
player begin to feel they have "exhausted" the interactive
story. In fact, full appreciation of the experience requires
the story be played multiple times.
Change in the plot should not be traceable to distinct
branch points; the player will not be offered an occasional
small number of obvious choices that force the plot in a
different direction. Rather, the plot should be smoothly
mutable, varying in response to some global state which is
itself a function of the many small actions performed by
the player throughout the experience.
Even when the same plot plays out multiple times, the
details of how the plot plays out, that is, the exact timing

of events and the lines of dialog spoken, should vary both
as a function of the player's interaction and in response to
"harmless" random variation, that is, random variation
that expresses the same thing in different ways.
Distributable. The system will be implemented on a
platform that is reasonably distributable, with the
intention of getting the interactive experience into the
hands of as many people as possible. It should not just be
an interesting demo in a closed door lab, but be
experienced by people in the real world. Ultimately, this
is the only way to validate the ideas.

Story Requirements
The story requirements describe the properties that the
story itself should have. These are not intended to be
absolute requirements; that is, this is not a description of
the properties that all interactive stories must have.
Rather, these requirements are the set of assumptions
grounding the design of this particular interactive story
we intend to build.
Short one-act play. Any one run of the scenario should
take the player 10 to 15 minutes to complete. We focus on
a short story for a couple of reasons. Building an
interactive story has all the difficulties of writing and
producing a non-interactive story (film or play) plus all
the difficulty of supporting true player agency in the
story. In exploring this new interactive art form it makes
sense to first work with a distilled form of the problem,
exploring scenarios with the minimum structure required
to support dramatically interesting interaction. In
addition, a short one-act play is an extreme, contrarian
response to the many hours of game play celebrated in the
design of contemporary computer games. Instead of
providing the player with 40 to 60 hours of episodic
action and endless wandering in a huge world, we want to
design an experience that provides the player with 10 to
15 minutes of emotionally intense, tightly unified,
dramatic action. The story should have the intensity,
economy and catharsis of traditional drama.
Relationships. Rather than being about manipulating
magical objects, fighting monsters, and rescuing
princesses, the story should be about the emotional
entanglements of human relationships. We are interested
in interactive experiences that appeal to the adult, noncomputer geek, movie-and-theater-going public.
Three characters. The story should have three
characters, two controlled by the computer and one
controlled by the player. Three is the minimum number of
characters needed to support complex social interaction
without placing the responsibility on the player to
continually move the story forward. If the player is shy or
confused about interacting, the two computer controlled
characters can conspire to set up dramatic situations, all
the while trying to get the player involved.
The player should be the protagonist. Ideally the player
should experience the change in the protagonist as a

personal journey. The player should be more than an
"interactive observer," not simply poking at the two
computer controlled characters to see how they change.
Embodied interaction should matter. Though dialog
should be a significant (perhaps the primary) mechanism
for character interaction, it should not be the sole
mechanism. Embodied interaction, such as moving from
one location to another, picking up an object, or touching
a character, should play a role in the action. These
physical actions should carry emotional and symbolic
weight, and should have a real influence on the characters
and their evolving interaction. The physical representation
of the characters and their environment should support
action significant to the plot.
Action takes place in a single location. This provides
unity of space and forces a focus on plot and character
interaction.
The player should not be over-constrained by a role.
The amount of non-interactive exposition describing the
player's role should be minimal. The player should not
have the feeling of playing a role, of actively having to
think about how the character they are playing would
react. Rather, the player should be able to be themselves
as they explore the dramatic situation. Any role-related
scripting of the interactor (Murray 1998) should occur as
a natural by-product of their interaction in the world. The
player should "ease into" their role; the role should be the
"natural" way to act in the environment, given the
dramatic situation.

The Story
The particular story we plan to build, which satisfies the
project and story requirements, is a domestic drama in
which a married couple has invited the player over for
dinner. (Assume for the moment that the player’s
character is male.) Grace and Trip are apparently a model
couple, socially and financial successful, well-liked by
all. Grace and Trip both know the player from work. Trip
and the player are friends; Grace and the player have
gotten to know each other fairly recently. Shortly after
arriving at their house for dinner, Grace confesses to the
player that she has fallen in love with him. Throughout
the rest of the evening, the player discovers that Grace
and Trip's marriage is actually falling apart. Their
marriage has been sour for years; deep differences, buried
frustrations and unspoken infidelities have killed their
love for each other. How the veneer of their marriage
cracks, what is revealed, and the final disposition of
Grace and Trip's marriage, and Grace and the player's
relationship, depends on the actions of the player.
The above story description assumes a male player.
Ideally the player will be able to choose whether they
wish to be a male or female player (important to support
the “player should not be over-constrained by a role”
story requirement). In the case of a female player, the
story would play itself out symmetrically, with Trip
confessing his love for the player. For the purposes of this

story, we are assuming heterosexual relationships. Ideally,
sexual orientation would be selectable by the player as
well.
Given these project and story requirements, many
technology issues are raised, including interface issues,
integrating plot and character, and supporting dramatic
dialog. The rest of this paper will focus on the particular
issue of integration of plot and character.

Autonomy and Story-Based Believable Agents
Most work in believable agents has been organized
around the metaphor of strong autonomy. Such an agent
chooses its next action based on local perception of its
environment plus internal state corresponding to the goals
and possibly the emotional state of the agent. All decision
making is organized around the accomplishment of the
individual, private, goals of the agent. Using autonomy as
a metaphor driving the design of believable agents works
well for believable agent applications in which a single
agent is facilitating a task, such as instructing a student
(Lester & Stone 1997), or giving a presentation (Andre,
Rist, and Mueller 1998), or in entertainment applications
in which a user develops a long-term relationship with the
characters by "hanging-out" with them (Stern, Frank, and
Resner 1998). But for believable agents used as characters
in a story world, strong autonomy becomes problematic.
Characters in a story world are there not to believably
convey their personalities but rather to have the right
characteristics to take the actions required to move the
story forward. That is, knowing which action to take at
any given time depends not just on the private internal
state of the agent plus current world state, but also on the
current story state. And the current story state includes
information about all the characters involved in the story,
plus the entire past history of the interaction considered as
a story, that is, as a sequence of actions building on each
other and moving towards some end. The global nature of
story state is inconsistent with the notion of an
autonomous character that makes decisions based only on
private goal and emotion state and local sensing of the
environment.
Only a small amount of work has been done on the
integration of story and character. This work has
preserved the strong autonomy of the characters by
architecturally dividing the responsibility for state
maintenance between a drama manager, which is
responsible for maintaining story state, and the believable
agents, which are responsible for maintaining character
state and making the moment-by-moment behavior
decisions (Weyhrauch 1997; Blumberg and Galyean
1995). These two components communicate via a narrowbandwidth, one-directional interface flowing from drama
manager to agent. The messages sent across this interface
consist of goals that characters should assume or perhaps
specific actions they should perform. The character is still
responsible for most of the decision making. Occasionally
the drama manager will modify one or more of the

characters behaviors (by giving them a new goal or
directly instigating a behavior) so as to move the plot
along. In the absence of the drama manager, the character
would still perform its normal autonomous behavior. The
idea seems to be that one can author fully autonomous
believable agents which are able to convey their
personalities in the absence of any story, drop them into a
story world being managed by a drama manager, and now
have those characters participate in the story under the
drama manager's guidance.
This architecture makes several assumptions regarding
the nature of interactive drama and believable agents:
drama manager decisions are infrequent, the internal
structure of the believable agents can be reasonably
decoupled from their interaction with the drama manager,
and multiple-character coordination is handled within the
agents. Let's explore each of these assumptions.
Infrequent guidance of strongly autonomous believable
agents means that most of the time, behavior selection for
the believable agents will occur locally, without reference
to any (global) story state. The drama manager will
intervene to move the story forward at specific points; the
rest of the time the story will be "drifting," that is, action
will be occurring without explicit attention to story
movement. Weyhrauch (Weyhrauch 1997) does state that
his drama manager was designed for managing the
sequencing of plot points, that is, for guiding characters so
as to initiate the appropriate next scene necessary to make
the next plot point happen (whatever plot point has been
decided by the drama manager). Within a scene, some
other architectural component, a "scene manager," would
be necessary to manage the playing out of the individual
scene. And this is where the assumption of infrequent,
low-bandwidth guidance becomes violated. As is
described in the next section, the smallest unit of story
structure within a scene is the beat, a single
action/reaction pair. The scene-level drama manager will
thus need to continuously guide the autonomous decision
making of the agent. This frequent guidance from the
drama manager will be complicated by the fact that lowbandwidth guidance (such as giving a believable agent a
new goal) will interact strongly with the moment-bymoment internal state of the agent, such as the set of
currently active goals and behaviors, leading to surprising,
and usually unwanted, behavior. In order to reliably guide
an agent, the scene-level drama manager will have to
engage in higher-bandwidth guidance involving the active
manipulation of internal agent state (e.g. editing the
currently active goal tree). Authoring strongly
autonomous characters for story-worlds is not only extra,
unneeded work (given that scene-level guidance will need
to intervene frequently), but actively makes guidance
more difficult, in that the drama manager will have to
compensate for the internal decision-making processes
(and associated state) of the agent.
Thinking of a believable agent as an autonomous,
independent character leads to a style of agent authoring
focusing on the goals, motivations, behaviors and

emotional states of the agent independent of their
participation within a story context or their interactions
with other agents. The internal structure of these agents is
decoupled from consideration of how they will be guided
by a drama manager. But, as mentioned above, any goal
or behavior level guidance will strongly interact with the
agent's internal decision making processes and state.
Reliable guidance will be greatly facilitated by building
hooks into the agents, that is, goals and behaviors that are
specifically designed to be activated by the drama
manager, and which have been carefully crafted so as to
override the agent's autonomous behavior in an
appropriate manner. But to the extent that authoring storybased believable agents requires special attention to
guideability, this brings into question how useful it is to
think of the believable agents as "autonomous" in the first
place.
As the drama manager provides guidance, it will often
be the case that the manager will need to carefully
coordinate multiple characters so as to make the next
story event happen. For example, it may be important for
two characters to argue in such a way as to reveal specific
information at a certain moment in the story. In a sense
the real goal of these two characters is to conspire towards
the revelation of a specific piece of information by
arguing with each other. But an author who thinks of the
characters as autonomous will tend to focus on the
individual character goals, not story-level goals. To make
a story-level goal happen, the character author will have
to somehow coordinate the individual character goals and
behaviors so that as the characters individually react to
each other, the resulting interaction "just happens" to
achieve the story goal. An alternative to this is to back
away from the stance of strong autonomy and provide
special goals and behaviors within the individual agents
that the drama manager can activate to create coordinated
behavior (a specific instance of providing hooks as
described above). But even if the character author
provides these special coordination hooks, coordination is
still being handled at the individual goal and behavior
level, in an ad-hoc way, on a case-by-case basis. What
one really wants is a way to directly express coordinated
character action at a level above the individual characters.
At this point the assumptions made by an interactive
drama architecture consisting of a drama manager guiding
strongly autonomous agents have been found problematic.
The next section presents a sketch of a plot and character
architecture that addresses these problems.

Integrating Plot and Character with the
Dramatic Beat
In dramatic writing, stories are thought of as consisting of
events that turn (change) values (McKee 1997). A value is
a property of an individual or relationship, such as trust,
love, hope (or hopelessness), etc. In fact, a story event is
precisely any activity that turns a value. If there is activity

– characters running around, lots of witty dialog,
buildings and bridges exploding, and so on – but this
activity is not turning a value, then there is no story event,
no dramatic action. Thus one of the primary goals of an
interactive drama system should be to make sure that all
activity turns values, and is thus a story event. Of course
these values should be changed in such a way as to make
some plot arc happen that enacts the story premise. The
premise is the controlling idea of the story (Mckee 1997),
such as “Goodness triumphs when we outwit evil”, or “To
be happy you must be true to yourself”.
Major value changes occur in each scene. Each scene is
a large-scale story event (but in the case of our short oneact story, not necessarily as lengthy as a scene in a feature
film or full-length play). In our story, an example of a
scene would be “Grace confesses her love for the player”.
Scenes are composed of beats, the smallest unit of value
change. Any activity below the level of the beat is not
associated with value change. Roughly, a beat consists of
an action/reaction pair between characters. For example,
in the case where action is being carried by dialog, a beat
could simply consist of one character speaking a line of
dialog, and another character reacting.
Generally
speaking, in the interest of maintaining economy and
intensity, a beat should not last longer than a few actions
or lines of dialog.

Scenes and Beats as Architectural Entities
Given that the drama manager's primary goal is to make
sure that activity in the story world is dramatic action, and
thus turns values, it makes sense to have the drama
manager use scenes and beats as architectural entities.
In computational terms, a scene consists of
preconditions, a description of the value(s) intended to be
changed by the scene (e.g. love between Grace and the
player moves from low to high), a (potentially large)
collection of beats with which to construct the scene, and
a description of the arc that the value(s) changed by the
scene should follow within the scene. The scene
precondition tests whether the scene is appropriate given
the current story and character state. The story state
consists of the current story values and other global state
such as active conversational topics, physical locations
occupied by the characters, etc. To decide which scene to
attempt to make happen next, the drama manager
examines the list of unused scenes and chooses the one
that has a satisfied precondition and whose value change
best matches the shape of the global plot arc.
Once a scene has been selected, the drama manager
tries to make the scene play out by selecting beats that
change values appropriately. A beat consists of
preconditions, a description of the values changed by the
beat, success and failure conditions, and a joint plan to be
executed by the characters. Like the preconditions on
scenes, preconditions on beats also test story and
character state for beat appropriateness. The success and
failure conditions are tests that indicate when a beat has
succeeded or failed and, for polymorphic beats, indicate

which specific beat should be considered to have occurred
given how the beat was terminated (this will be described
in more detail below). The joint plan coordinates the
characters in order to carry out the specific beat.

The Function of Beats
Beats serve several functions within the architecture.
First, beats are the smallest unit of dramatic value change.
They are the fundamental building blocks of the
interactive story. Second, beats are the fundamental unit
of character guidance. The beat defines the granularity of
plot/character interaction. Finally, the beat is the
fundamental unit of player interaction. The beat is the
smallest granularity at which the player can engage in
meaningful (having meaning for the story) interaction. A
player's activity is interpreted as having affected the story
only to the extent that this activity participates in a beat.

Polymorphic Beats
The player's activity within a beat will often determine
exactly which values are changed by a beat and by how
much. For example, imagine that Trip becomes
uncomfortable with the current conversation - perhaps at
this moment in the story Grace is beginning to reveal
problems in their relationship – and he tries to change the
topic, perhaps by offering to get the player another drink.
The combination of Grace's line of dialog (revealing a
problem in their relationship), Trip's line of dialog
(attempting to change the topic), and the player's response
is a beat. Now if the player responds by accepting Trip's
offer for a drink, the attempt to change the topic was
successful, Trip may now feel a closer bond to the player,
Grace may feel frustrated and angry with both Trip and
the player, and the degree to which relationship problems
have been revealed does not increase. We might label
such a beat "Grace fails to discuss her marriage" or
equivalently "Trip successfully changes topic away from
marriage." On the other hand, if the player directly
responds to Grace's line, either ignoring Trip, or perhaps
chastising Trip for trivializing what Grace said, then the
attempt to change the topic was unsuccessful, Trip's
affiliation with the player may decrease and Grace's
increase, and the degree to which relationship problems
have been revealed increases. We might label this beat
"Grace successfully brings up troubles with marriage."
Before the player reacts to Grace and Trip, the drama
manager does not know which beat will actually occur.
This beat is a polymorphic beat. The drama manager
selects this beat based on a range of effects that might
occur. While the beat is executing, it is labeled "open."
Once the player "closes" the beat by responding, the
drama manager can now update the story history (a
specific beat has now occurred) and the rest of the story
state (dramatic values, etc.).

Joint Plans
Associated with each beat is a joint plan that guides the
character behavior during that beat. Instead of directly
initiating an existing goal or behavior within the
character, the drama manager hands the characters new
plans (behaviors) to be carried out during this beat. These
plans are joint plans: they describe the coordinated
activity required of all the characters in order to carry out
the beat. As discussed in section 3, it is possible to write
individual character behaviors that use ad-hoc
communication (either in the form of sensing, or some
form of direct, out-of-band message passing) to achieve
multi-character coordination. It is difficult, however, for a
behavior author to understand ahead of time all the
synchronization problems that can occur; as unforeseen
synchronization problems appear during play-testing,
repeated patching and re-authoring of the behaviors will
be necessary. In addition, the behavior author will have to
separately solve the coordination problems of each new
behavior involving multiple characters. However, multiagent coordination frameworks such as joint intentions
theory (Cohen and Levesque 1991) or shared plans (Grosz
and Kraus 1996) provide a systematic analysis of all the
synchronization issues that arise when agents jointly carry
out plans. Tambe (Tambe 1997) has built an agent
architecture providing direct support for joint plans. His
architecture uses the more formal analyses of joint
intentions and shared plans theory to provide the
communication
requirements
for
maintaining
coordination; when a joint plan is being carried out, the
architecture automatically takes care of all the necessary
message passing. We propose modifying the reactive
planning language Hap (Loyall and Bates 1991; Loyall
1997), a language specifically designed for the authoring
of believable agents, to include this coordination
framework.
Beats will hand the characters joint plans to carry out
which have been designed to accomplish the beat. This
means that most (perhaps all) of the high level goals and
plans that drive a character will no longer be located
within the character at all, but rather will be parceled out
among the beats. Given that the purpose of character
activity within a story world is to create dramatic action,
this is an appropriate way of distributing the characters'
behavior. The beat is precisely the smallest unit of
dramatic action (the smallest unit that turns values). The
character behavior is now organized around the dramatic
functions that the behavior serves, rather than organized
around a conception of the character independent of the
dramatic action (a conception thus requiring the drama
manager to coerce the character into serving the action).
Since the joint plans associated with beats are still
reactive plans, there is no loss of character reactivity to a
rapidly changing environment. Low-level goals and
behaviors (e.g. locomotion, ways to express emotion,
personality moves, etc.) will still be contained within
individual characters. These low-level behaviors provide a

library of character-specific actions that are available to
the higher-level behaviors handed down by the beats.

A Response to the Problem of Autonomy
In the section "Autonomy and Story-based Believable
Agents" we critiqued interactive drama architectures that
consist of strongly autonomous characters guided by a
drama manager. In this section we discuss how our
proposed architecture addresses these issues.
In our architecture, the individual characters are no
longer strongly autonomous. In the absence of the drama
manager, the characters will not take action (or perhaps
will only have very simple reactions to the environment).
The beat level of the drama manager provides frequent
guidance to the characters by giving them reactive joint
plans to carry out. These frequent, beat-level decisions are
made based on the global story state. Multiple characters
are coordinated at the beat level; character authors are not
forced to provide ad-hoc coordination within individual
characters. Since the characters contain only low-level
goals and behaviors, there is no complex character state
complicating drama manager guidance. There is no longer
a tension between authoring self-contained autonomous
characters that have independent motivations, and
providing those characters with the appropriate "hooks" to
support guidance by an external process. Instead, the
characters become libraries of character-specific ways of
accomplishing low-level tasks; all higher-level motivation
is provided by the drama manager. Thus this architecture
addresses the tension between autonomy and dramatic
guidance by backing away from strong autonomy on the
part of characters and instead having dramatic guidance
be responsible for most high-level character behavior.

Conclusion
In this paper we described the project goals of a new
interactive drama project being undertaken by the authors.
A major goal of this project is to integrate character and
story into a complete dramatic world. We then explored
the assumptions underlying architectures which propose
that story worlds should consist of strongly autonomous
believable agents guided by a drama manager, and found
those assumptions problematic. Finally, we gave a brief
sketch of our interactive drama architecture which
addresses
these
problems.
This
architecture
operationalizes structures found in the theory of dramatic
writing, particularly the notions of changing dramatic
values, and organizing dramatic value change around the
scene and the beat.

Bibliography
Andre, E., Rist, T., Mueller, J. 1998. Integrating Reactive
and Scripted Behaviors in a Life-Like Presentation Agent.
Proc. of the Second International Conference on
Autonomous Agents (Agents '98), pp. 261-268.

Bates, J. 1992. Virtual Reality, Art, and Entertainment.
Presence: The Journal of Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments 1(1): 133-138.
Bates, J., Loyall, A. B., and Reilly, W. S. 1992.
Integrating Reactivity, Goals, and Emotion in a Broad
Agent. Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, Bloomington, Indiana,
July 1992.
Blumberg, B. 1996. Old Tricks, New Dogs: Ethology and
Interactive Creatures. Ph.D. Dissertation. MIT Media Lab.
Blumberg, B. and Galyean, T. 1995. Multi-level Direction
of Autonomous Creatures for Real-Time Virtual
Environments. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 95.
Cohen, P. and Levesque, H. 1991. Teamwork. Nous, 35.
Grosz, B. and Kraus, S. 1996. Collaborative plans for
complex group actions. Artificial Intelligence, 86, 269 358.
Hayes-Roth, B., van Gent, R. and Huber, D. 1997. Acting
in character. In R. Trappl and P. Petta (Eds.), Creating
Personalities for Synthetic Actors. Berlin, New York:
Springer.
Lester, J., Stone, B. 1997. Increasing Believability in
Animated Pedagogical Agents. Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Autonomous Agents. Marina
del Rey, CA, USA, 16-21.
Loyall, A. B. 1997. Believable Agents. Ph.D. thesis, Tech
report CMU-CS-97-123, Carnegie Mellon University.
Loyall, A. B., and Bates, J. 1991. Hap: A Reactive,
Adaptive Architecture for Agents. Technical Report
CMU-CS-91-147. Department of Computer Science.
Carnegie Mellon University.
Mateas, M. 1999. An Oz-Centric Review of Interactive
Drama and Believable Agents. In M. Wooldridge and M.
Veloso, (Eds.), AI Today: Recent Trends and
Developments. Lecture Notes in AI 1600. Berlin, New
York: Springer.
McKee, R. 1997. Story: Substance, Structure, Style, and
the Principles of Screenwriting. New York, NY:
HarperCollins.
Murray, Janet.
1998. Hamlet on the Holodeck.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stern, A.; Frank, A.; and Resner, B. 1998. Virtual Petz: A
hybrid approach to creating autonomous, lifelike Dogz
and Catz. In Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Autonomous Agents, 334-335. Menlo Park,
Calif.: AAAI Press
Tambe, M. 1997. Towards Flexible Teamwork. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research (7) 83-124.
Weyhrauch, P. 1997. Guiding Interactive Drama. Ph.D.
thesis, Tech report CMU-CS-97-109, Carnegie Mellon
University.

