From: AAAI Technical Report FS-99-01. Compilation copyright © 1999, AAAI (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Notes on the Use of Plan Structures in the Creation of Interactive

Plot

R. Michael
Young
Department of Computer Science
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC27695-7534
young@csc.nesu.edu

of Narrative
for Interactive
Systems
An interactive system defines a virtual space, whether
the system’s interface provides access to the inhospitable planet of Stroggos or the Microsoft Windows
desktop. Users of both these systems interact with a
place, one created by a computer and in which users
and computational agents carry out their individual and
collective activities. The intuitive and often-discussed
benefit of a well-designed interface metaphoris that it
allows users to carry over conventions from their "real"
experience when performing tasks within the interface
world.
Another key and often unarticulated value of an
interface arises from the interface’s mimetic quality.
While mimesisis often discussed by narrative theorists
as a contrast to diegesis, distinguishing the concepts of
showing versus telling (Aristotle), myemphasis here
is to distinguish between an artifact that is intended
to be an imitation of something, but is not really that
thing and an artifact that is intended to be mistaken as
that thing. An example of the former case would be a
film of a fictional account of the D-Daylanding on the
beaches of Normandy. An example of the later might
be a virtual reality system displaying photo-realistic
graphical imagesof a physical space. D-Daystories like
The Longest Day and Saving Private Ryan are, in some
ways, imitations, and so are more mimetic than VRsystems whosedesign is intended to "...produce synthetic
images visually and measurably indistinguishable from
real world images." (Greenberg 1999)(pg. 45).
The interface to a virtual space presents an abstracted, artificial representation of a world and the
activities within it; it is the mimeticcharacter of the
space, together with our understanding that we are interacting with a mimetic artiflcat, that allows us as
users to bring to bear all our knowledgeof narrative
understanding during our interaction (Brannigan 1992).
Whena user enters into a such a virtual space, it is as
if a narrative contract is established betweenthe user
and the system’s authors. 1 The contract establishes

the expectation that the system will obey certain narrative conventions. In this way, the contract is beneficial to both designer and user. It facilitates the user’s
comprehensionby licensing interpretation of experience
within the system’s interface in ways that would not
otherwise be open. It provides the designer with useful constrains on the system’s performance, delivering
a ready-made vocabulary from which the designer constructs the events that occur in the virtual world. In
manyways, this narrative contract functions similarly
to Grice’s Cooperative Principle (Grice 1957).
It is the interactive character of the interface that
contributes most strongly to the creation of a sense
of narrative in its use (Reeves & Nass 1996), and the
mediated nature of this interaction provides the hook
needed to integrate intelligent systems into narrativebased computer programs. From the graphical rendering of the world to the execution of the simplest of user
actions, all aspects of a user’s activity with interactive
systemare controlled (or at least, they’re controllable).
Somesystem designs maychose to abdicate control to
the user or pass over muchof the mediation that might
take place. For interactive systems, mediation provides
the fulcrum on which to leverage the power of a computational modelof narrative.
In this extended abstract I describe a particular approach to the computational modeling of plot as described by narrative theorists. This modelextends techniques from recent approaches to AI planning (Young,
Pollack, ~ Moore 1994) -- particularly the combined
representation of the causal and hierarchical structure
of plans and the methods by which the plans are constructed -- to capture key features of narrative structure. Below, I provide two short discussions with exampies of howthese models of plans and planning can be
used to create interactive, plot-based narrative experiences. First, I sketch briefly howa plan-based representation can be used to share control of plot flow between
a user and an interactive system. Then I discuss a technique for modeling the suspense experienced by a user
while experiencing an unfolding plot.

1 See a compellingand muchmoreextensive discussion by
KendalWaltonon the role of mimesisand its relationship

to make-belleve(Walton1990).

Models

164

Reasoning

About

Actions
in Plots
and
Plans
Adopting a model of plot
In our work in the Liquid Narrative research group
at North Carolina State University, we are developing computational models of the narrative structure
described by narrative theorists such as Bal (1997),
Rimmon-Keenan (1983), Ryan (1991) and others.
While particular frameworksfor representing narrative
vary from individual to individual, in manymodels,
narrative structure is characterized hierarchically. At
the lowest level is the fabula, consisting of the agents
that populate a story world, along with the actions that
these agents perform and the causal and temporal relationships between them. The next level, that of the
story, consists of a subset of the events in the fabula
to be conveyedto the reader, with a particular ordering imposedon this subset indicating the order of the
telling. The final level is the level of the text, in which
the story elements are realized in a particular medium
(e.g text, film) for communicationto the reader.
A model of plot as plan
Agents, actions and their causal relationships are not
new to Artificial Intelligence. These notions are the
stuff that makes up most representational schemes in
planning research. The idea that plans might be put to
use to represent plot is also not new (Schank3z Abelson
1977). However,the planning representations that have
previously been used to represent plot have roughly
been based on early, ad hoc modelsof plans (Sacerdoti
1977). As a result, aspects of narrative in these systems
reflected the representational limitations of the underlying plan structure.
Our work employs recent models of plans and planning from AI to represent the hierarchical and causal
nature of narratives identified by narrative theorists.
Specifically, we are using a modelof planning that differs from others previously used in narrative contexts
in at least two ways. First, the plan representation
that we employcontains a rich, formal representation
of the causal structure of a plan. Each causal dependency betweengoal, precondition and effect in the plan
is carefully delineated during plan construction. Second, the plan construction process we use is one of
search through the space of all possible plans rather
than the incremental construction of a single plan. Consequently, the systemcan characterize a plan relative to
the broader context in which it occurs. As I describe
below, both of these features can be used to create and
maintain narrative structure in an interactive system.
An AI Architecture
for an Interactive
Narrative
System
In the type of interactive narrative system we envision,
a user performsactivities within a virtual space, either
singly or with other users and/or computational agents.

165

The application maybe explicitly story-oriented or not,
but in either case interaction within the environment
is structured as a narrative. To achieve this type of
interaction, the system uses the following components:
* A declarative representation for action within the
environment. This may appear in annotations
to virtual worlds suggested by Doyle and HayesRoth (1998), specifically targeted at the representational level required to piece together plot using
plan-based techniques described in (B).
* A programthat can use this representation to create,
modify and maintain narrative-structured plans for
interaction with the environment. The plans represent the activities of users, system-controlled agents
and the environmentitself.
This program consists of two parts: an AI planning
algorithm and an execution monitoring component.
The planning algorithm forms plans for user and
system interaction that contain such interesting and
compellingnarrative structure as rising action, balanced conflict between protagonist and antagonist,
suspense and foreshadowing. The execution monitor
detects user activities that deviate from the planned
narrative and decides how to respond. The response
might take the form of re-planning the narrative by
modifying the unexperienced portions of the narrative plan, or it might take the form of system intervention in the virtual world by preventing the user’s
deviation from the current plan structure.
* A theory capable of characterizing plans based on
their narrative aspects. This theory informs the program in (B) above, guiding the construction of plans
whose local and global structure are mappedinto the
narrative structures of conflict, suspense, etc.
In the following two examples, I suggest ways that
plan representations can be used 1) to detect and respond appropriately to a user’s deviation from a given
plot line and 2) to characterize plans in terms of their
narrative features.
Exploiting
Plan Structure
to Share
Control
in Narrative
Environments
For the designer of a narrative-oriented system that allows substantive user interaction, the greatest design
challenge revolves aroundthe distribution of control between the system and its users. If a design removesall
control from the user, the resulting systemis reduced to
conventional narrative forms such as literature or film.
If a design provides the user with complete control, the
narrative coherence of a user’s interaction is limited by
her ownknowledgeand abilities.
Most interactive narrative-based systems have taken
a middle ground, specifying at design-time sets of actions from which the user can choose at a fixed set of
points through a narrative. The resulting collection of
narrative paths is structured so that each path provides
the user with an interesting narrative experience. This

approach, of course, limits the numberand type of stories that can be told.
Our approach is to provide a mechanism by which
narrative plans are generated at execution time, in response to user preferences and other contextual factors
(e.g., other users~ unfolding narratives within the same
virtual space). The plans we use contain a rich causal
structure; all causal relationships betweensteps in the
plans are specifically markedby data structures called
causal links. To ensure that the plans are functionally
correct, these links are originally added to a plan at
construct.ion time. Weput them to use at execution
time; in our system, when a user attempts to performs
an action, the declarative representation of that action
is checkedagainst the causal links present in the plan.
If the successful completionof the user’s action poses a
threat to any of the causal links, an exception is raised.
Exceptions are dealt with in one of two ways. The
most straightforward is via intervention. Because all
of a user’s actions in the environmentare mediated, it
is the system itself that determines whether an action
succeeds or fails. Typically, the success or failure of
an action within a virtual environment is determined
by software that approximates the rules of the underlying story world (e.g., firing a railgun directly at
Strogg Enforcer results in the Strogg’s timely death).
However,whena user’s action would violate one of the
narrative plan’s constraints, the system can intervene,
causing the action to fail. In the Strogg example, this
might be achieved by surrepticiously substituting an
alternate action for execution, one in which the "natural" outcomeis consistent with the existing plan’s constraints. A railgun misfiring, for instance, or a shot
that misses its mark by a hair’s width, preserve the apparent consistency of the user’s interaction while Mso
maintaining the Enforcer’s presence in the storyworld.
The second response to an exception is to adjust the
narrative structure of the plan to accommodatethe
new activity of the user. The resolution of the conflict caused by the exception may involve only minor
restructuring of the plan, for instance, selecting a different but compatible location for an event when the
user takes an unexpected turn down a new path. Alternatively, this mayinvolve more substantive changes
to the plan, for instance, should a user stumble uponthe
key to a mystery early in a narrative or unintentionally
destroy a device required to rescue a narrative’s central
character.
There are, of course, manyopen research questions.
Oneinvolves deciding between the two categories of response. If a system is constantly altering the narrative plan in response to user activities, interaction may
reduce to one in which no narrative coherence exists.
Alternatively, if user actions are constantly failing, the
user’s illusion of control disappears and the immersive
natural of the virtual world recedes. Similarly, knowing when and how to intervene or how to restructure
a narrative plan are two central issues that are, as yet,
unresolved.

166

Creating
and Manipulating
Suspense
Recent work in cognitive psychology (Ohler & Nieding 1983; Gerrig & Bernardo 1994; Comisky & Bryant
1982) has considered the role of narrative structure in
the creation and maintenance of suspense in film and
literature.
Gerrig and Bernardo (1994) suggest that
people whoread fiction act as problem-solvers, continuously looking for solutions to the plot-based dilemmas
faced by the characters in a story world. This work indicates that a reader’s suspense is greater whenfewer
solutions to the hero’s current problem can be found
by the viewer. Weare currently developing a cognitive
modelof a user’s plot-based reasoning that can be used
to structure a user’s interaction to increase or decrease
her feeling of suspenseat specific points in the interaction (~%ung1999).
Our cognitive model employs the model of planning
as search defined by Kambhampati
et al (1995). In this
approach, finding a solution to a planning problem involves search through a space of plans, represented as a
directed graph. Nodesin this space represent (possibly
partial) plans. Arcs from one node to another indicate that the second node is a refinement of the first,
that is, that the plan represented by the second node
is an incrementally more complete version of the plan
at the first node. The root node of the graph contains
the empty plan and the leaf nodes of the graph contain solution plans (i.e., complete plans that solve the
planning problem).
By characterizing the space of plans that a user might
consider when solving problems faced by a protagonist
at a given point in a plot, the model can makepredictions about the amount of suspense a user will experience at that point. The greater the numberof solution plans at the leaves of the graph, the less suspense
the user is likely to experience. Moreinterestingly, the
model can also be used to suggest ways to increase or
decrease suspense by manipulating the knowledgeheld
by the user about the state of the story world and the
actions available within it. Weare currently implementing these ideas and plan to evaluate the validity of the
approach empirically.
The Role of Narrative
in Our Research
In the workwe are performing, narrative plays two central roles. The first is as the central target application.
Aspects of narrative play a key role in learning, communication, social interaction, our arts and recreation.
In our work, we seek to understand humaninteraction
in these contexts and apply this understanding to the
structure of human-computerinteraction designed to
exploit our commonorientation towards narrative.
Narrative, and more specifically narrative theory,
plays a second role as the source for formal modelsthat
can be adopted to characterize interaction in the contexts listed above. By adopting a cross-disciplinary approach, we gain access to the body of work on narrative
that dates back to Aristotle. Further, we provide col-

laborators in narrative theory with computational tools
for modelingnarrative interactions that have previously
been unavailable to them and in return they provide
critical feedback and analysis of our efforts that prove
essential in refining our models.
References
Aristotle. Poetics.
Bal, M. 1997. Narralology: Introduction to the Theory
of Narrative. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Brannigan, E. 1992. Narrative Comprehension and
Film. NewYork: Routledge.
Comisky, P., and Bryant, J. 1982. Factors involved
in generating suspense. HumanCommunication Research 9(1):49-58.
Doyle, P., and ttayes-Roth, B. 1998. Agents in annotated worlds. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on AutonomousAgents.
Gerrig, R., and Bernardo, D. 1994. Readers as
problem-solvers in the experience of suspense. Poetics
22:459-472.
Greenberg, D. P. 1999. A frameworkfor realistic image
synthesis. Communicationsof the ACM42(8):45-53.
Grice, H. P. 1957. Meaning. Philosophical Review
68:377-388.
Kambhampati,S.; Knobloek, C.; and Qiang, Y. 1995.
Planning as refinement search: a unified frameworkfor
evaluating design tradeoffs in partial-order planning.
Artificial Intelligence 76:167-238.
Ohler, P., and Nieding, G. 1983. Cognitive modeling
of suspense-inducing structures in films. In Vorderer,
P.; Wulff, H.; and Friedrichsen, M., eds., Suspense:
Conceptualizations, theoretical analyses and empirical
ezplirations. Lawrence Erlbaum. 167-208.
Reeves, B., and Nass, C. 1996. The Media Equation: HowPeople Treat Computers, Television, and
NewMedia Like Real People and Places. Cambridge
University Press.
Rimmon-Keenan,S. 1983. Narrative Fiction: Contemporary Poetics. London: Routledge.
Ryan, M. 1991. Possibe Worlds, Artificial Intelligence
and .Narrative Theory. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Sacerdoti, E. D. 1977. A Structure for Plans and
Behavior. Artificial Intelligence Series. NewYork, New
York: Elsevier North-Holland, Inc.
Schank, R. C., and Abelson, R. P. 1977. Scripts,
Plans, Goals and Understanding. Hillsdale, NewJersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
VCalton, K. 1990. Mimesis as Make-Believe: One the
Foundation of the Representational Arts. Boston, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Young,R. M.; Pollack, M. E.; and Moore, J. D. 1994.
Decompositionand causality in partial order planning.

167

In Proceedings of the SecondInternational Conference
on AI and Planning Systems, 188-193.
Young, R. M. 1999. Cognitive and computational
models of suspense: Towardsthe automatic creation of
suspense in interactive narratives. Paper presented at
Interactive Frictions: The Conference Producedat the
Pressure Point Between Theory and Practive: An International Conferenceon Interactive _Narrative, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA.

