Agency Play: Dimensions of Agency for Interactive Narrative Design
D. Fox Harrell and Jichen Zhu
Digital Media Program, School of Literature, Communication, and Culture
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA
{fox.harrell,jichen.zhu}@lcc.gatech.edu

power to change, is this “false” illusion of control a mistake
overlooked by the designers of the game?
Digital media afford more active roles for users than traditional narrative forms in various ways. Murray (1998) identiﬁes this phenomenon of increased user agency and claims
it as one foundational property of digital media. She also
categorizes various ways in which user agency is externalized in interactive narrative works. Examples of user agency
include spatial navigation, problem solving, incorporating
gameplay actions within narratives, and traversing links in
hypertext narrative. Murray’s theory has inﬂuenced many
practitioners who set out to explore new narrative possibilities brought by digital media in which agency plays an important part. However, many attempts have been based on an
overly simpliﬁed understanding of agency, that is, agency as
free will of players.
Narrative-driven computer and console games comprise
the forms of interactive narrative that currently seem to have
most captured the popular consciousness (even if often sacriﬁcing narrative in favor of gaming conventions such as goalorientation, competition, winning/losing conditions, mechanisms to support these, and other strictly ludic elements).
In these games, a sense of free will is often conveyed to the
user by means of enabling robust forms of spatial navigation and interaction with objects in the game world. This
construal of agency inevitably leads to an obsession with the
idea that “the more agency, the better.” This phenomenon is
exempliﬁed in notions such as “full reactive eyes entertainment” or F.R.E.E., a concept proposed by game designer Yu
Suzuki during the development and marketing of the game
Shenmue (Sega 2000), which aspired to allow a character to
freely interact with every aspect of her environment. Yet,
despite the high degree of free will to interact with objects
in such a game, the slow pacing of its plot was consistently
viewed as a detraction from the game, perhaps with the high
degree of freedom detracting from meaningful narrative development, resulting in player boredom.
Moving beyond the simpliﬁed model of agency in games
such as discussed above, many interactive narrative researchers perceive a dilemma that has been termed the
“narrative paradox,” in which the user’s free will to navigate in, and interact with, a virtual environment is positioned orthogonally to a system’s capacity to narratively
structure the user’s experience. (Aylett & Louchart 2003;

Abstract
Agency in interactive narrative is often narrowly understood
as a user’s freedom to either perform virtually embodied actions or alter the mechanics of narration at will, followed by
an implicit assumption of “the more agency the better.” This
paper takes notice of a broader range of agency phenomena
in interactive narrative and gaming that may be addressed by
integrating accounts of agency from diverse ﬁelds such as sociology of science, digital media studies, philosophy, and cultural theory. The upshot is that narrative agency is contextually situated, distributed between the player and system, and
mediated through user interpretation of system behavior and
system affordances for user actions. In our new and developing model of agency play, multiple dimensions of agency
can be tuned during story execution as a narratively situated
mechanism to convey meaning. More importantly, we propose that this model of variable dimensions of agency can be
used as an expressive theoretical tool for interactive narrative
design. Finally, we present our current interactive narrative
work under development as a case study for how the agency
play model can be deployed expressively.

Keywords: agency play, user agency, system agency, interactive narrative, narrative theory

Introduction
You are playing a young brave warrior in a sparse landscape.
In order to save a loved one, you must slay towering mythical behemoths, one after another. After slaying a creature by
scaling it and plunging a sword into a tender point, the giant drops to its knees in melancholy slow motion. You run,
jump this way and that, trying to avoid black veins of dark
force rising from its body to seek you out. Inevitably, they
pierce you and the world turns black ...
The above paragraph describes a narrative scene from the
console video game Shadow of the Colossus (Sony Computer Entertainment 2005). Some readers may wonder why
the game design allows the player to perform actions immediately after slaying each monster when the resultant fall
into blackness is unavoidable; after all, many games would
use a pre-rendered, non-interactive cut-scene instead. Since
the ending of this scene is pre-determined and beyond user’s
Copyright c 2009, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

44

Louchart & Aylett 2003) Many authors seek to provide techniques to balance the two sides of this paradox such as in
(Cavazza, Charles, & Mead 2001) and (Young 2007). Indeed, some systems take this approach to the extreme, viewing the user’s free will as an existing in an adversarial relationship to the systems operation, e.g. Peter Weyrauch
has proposed an adversarial search algorithm to address this
problem. (Weyhrauch 1997)
Yet, though these perspectives necessitate sophisticated
means for moderating a user’s free will to act, such interactive narrative approaches still often seem to hold the
holodeck as a holy grail and offering the user a sense of
free will in a story world is still held as a goal. Thus, the
trade-offs engineered in systems rooted in this perspective
are meant to provide a sense of freedom of navigation and
interaction, along with incentives and/or constraints forcing
the user to submit to plot structures implemented in the story
world. In these systems, agency, again considered as free
will, is seen as something to be optimally balanced. Though
free will orientation is not the only portrait of agency encountered in interactive narrative research (agency in the
means of narration such as in hypertext ﬁction or camera
control in virtual worlds are other important concerns), it is
a major theme.
In contrast, we propose to broaden and complicate the notion of agency in interactive narrative research. We hence
emphasize that agency is mediated by (1) the full range of
player actions possible, (2) the range of effects of player actions both in the story world and in the narration or presentation of the story, and the (3) the system’s capacity to constrain and modify the story world. Both player and system
need to be taken into account as part of the discourse about
agency play. The interplay and interdependence between
the two seemingly oppositional concepts of user agency and
system agency provides us a starting point to systematically
describe a set of possibilities for deploying agency in interactive narrative media. We call this set of new possibilities
agency play.
The central argument of this paper is that “more is better models” of agency are outmoded, and solely free will
oriented models in general should be expanded with an understanding of agency as an expressive resource that can be
varied along many dimensions to result in meaningful and
aesthetic effects in interactive narrative works. Formerly,
such as in the heyday of hypertext ﬁction or adventure gaming, user agency was novel in the ability to traverse multiple
paths through, or even become a character within, an interactive narrative work. Full player agency became a type of
holy grail in the construction of interactive narrative works.
However, the ﬁeld has matured beyond that stage, and the
deployment of particular affordances for user agency is now
a stylistic choice carefully manipulated over the course of a
user’s experience to facilitate the goals of narrative system
designers.
To make this argument, the rest of the paper is organized
as follows. The next section traces cross-disciplinary notions of agency from various ﬁelds, and proposes an understanding of user agency as situated in the context and goals
of the narrative work at hand. Agency over some dimen-

sions of control such as moving a player character (PC) can
be pitted against agency in determining plot outcomes. The
section “System Agency” discusses the agency of computational systems, emphasizing the ways in which it is inseparable from user agency. Next, the section “Agency Play”
proposes our new model in which control over a broad set of
possible dimensions of user and system interaction becomes
a mechanism to convey meaning and express ideas. While
there are an increasing number of works that accomplish just
this, there has not to our knowledge been a systematic articulation of the range of expressive agency phenomena being
explored by interactive narrative and game designers, and
such phenomena have not been theorized sufﬁciently in a
systematic way. Toward this end, we look at cases in interactive narrative media and in games with strong narratively
structured content or rich story worlds. Finally, the section
“Case Study” presents our current interactive narrative work
under development as a demonstration of how our agency
play model can be deployed expressively.

A Situated Approach to Agency
Long before being adopted in the digital media theory, apprehending the concept of agency has been a central challenge in various disciplines including philosophy and anthropology, as well as political activism and critical cultural
theory. The focus here is addressing a set of theories that
allows us to scrutinize user agency in relation to the digital
technologies (computers, algorithms, etc) that go hand-inhand with it. The work of Andrew Pickering in the sociology
of scientiﬁc knowledge inﬂuences us in its distinction between human and material agency, articulation of a “dance”
between them, and focus upon a type of user agency as
knowledge of how to perform manipulations in a particular
conceptual system (e.g. how to perform elementary algebra
manipulations). (Pickering 1995) The actor-network theory
of Michel Callon and Bruno Latour has been inﬂuential in
our practice in the way it incorporates both human and nonhuman actors. (Latour 1996) Furthermore, in her review
of various accounts of agency, Laura M. Ahearn identiﬁes
three major trends of which the concept has been conceptualized over the past few decades, namely “agency as free
will”, “equating agency with resistance” and “the absence
of agency”(Ahearn 2001). Although the prevailing view in
the domain of interactive narrative aligns itself with the ﬁrst
trend, the recent years have witnessed increasing number of
experiments drawn on the other two accounts. At the end of
this section, we propose an approach to agency that is situated in particular social and narrative contexts and lends
itself to a range of expressive applications in interactive narrative works.

A Dance of Agency
Andrew Pickering focuses on a duality that he describes as
existing between “human agency” and “material agency.”
(Pickering 1995) Human agency centers upon the intentionality (aboutness) and actions taken by humans upon the
world. In particular, as he is interested in the types of agency
exhibited by scientists in the practice of knowledge production. He describes human disciplinary agency, recognizing

45

and knowing how to use/perform “a series of manipulations
within an established conceptual system.” In contrast, Pickering also describes “material agency” as the idea that the
world is “continually doing things, things that bear upon
us not as disembodied intellects but as forces upon material beings.” It is a view that sees science as an array of
forces that humans typically apprehend through the use of
machines. Pickering deﬁnes a “dance of agency” as the process where humans attempt to apprehend the agency of the
material world through the mediation of artifacts, and that
material world both yields to, and resists, human apprehension. Despite his focus on scientiﬁc practice, the notion that
there are symmetrical notions of human and material agency
engaged in a dielectical dance parallels our constructs of human agency and system agency in AI and interactive narrative practices.

The above examples refer to a user’s capacity to take actions and observe their results. As Ahearn reminds us, this
capacity is deeply connected to what philosophers call action theory in that each of the above examples requires certain concomitant mental states, such as “intention” (Davidson 2001) and “presence of the self” (Segal 1991). As action
theorist Segal puts it “[h]itting a ball is an action, falling
down a ﬂight of stairs is not. A theory of action seeks,
among other things, to explain the distinctions we make.”
Increasingly powerful hardware and more robustly interactive software have allowed designers to explore the decisions users can make at will in forms unimaginable to earlyday developers. For example, in the Xbox game Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic, the way a player controls her
character through the story determines its moral disposition
(whether it aligns with the light or dark side of the force),
the set of new skills it can learn, as well as the branches of
storyline which will be taken. (LucasArts 2003).
However, an unchecked focus on free will may lead to
unanticipated, and largely undesirable (though perhaps also
transgressive) consequences. In massively multi-player online role-playing games (MMORPG), grief players perform
actions not to advance game goals or for narratively oriented
fulﬁllment, but to intentionally aggravate and harass other
players. They kill other players, steal weapons and coins,
and even form virtual maﬁa, all in the pursuit of their own
enjoyment and free will version of “agency”.
The example of griefers echoes Ahearn’s warning to us.
“The main weakness in treating agency as a synonym for
free will,” she argues, “is that such an approach ignores or
only gives lip service to the social nature of agency and the
pervasive inﬂuence of culture on human intentions, beliefs,
and actions.” When adopted in the domain of interactive
narrative, this pitfall often transforms into the over ampliﬁcation of users’ freedom to act however they want, while
overlooking the importance of meaningful constraints and
conditions in the context of the story.

Actor-Network Theory
One useful perspective on this dance of agency is provided
by a sociological approach called Actor-Network Theory,
which was initiated by Bruno Latour and Michel Callon in
France in the 1980s (Latour 1996). Actor-network theory
is used to examine socio-technical networks that are used to
complete technical products. Responding to their own observations of the symmetrical nature of human and material
agency noted above, actor-network theorists do not distinguish “human” and “non-human” actors from one another
for most purposes, and uses the term “actant” to reﬂect this
non-bias. The human actants in a network must perform
acts of interpretation, which, in effect, are theories of the
system’s functioning (Goguen 2003); researchers investigating domains involving both human and non-human actors
such as AI-based interactive narrative should take this work
very seriously. Understanding a parallel between the user
agency enabled by the machine and the system agency that
is constantly interpreted by humans is key to understanding
the role, and nature, of agency in interactive narrative works.

Agency as Resistance

Agency as Free Will

“Agency as resistance” characterizes many works in feminist
theory and subaltern studies, in which traditions of social
resistance of the past and present are called into attention.
Many feminist theorists agree that, in order to demonstrate
agency, a person must resist the hegemonic patriarchal status
quo (Abu-Lughod 1990). This form of oppositional agency
has gradually been adopted by some users/artists/hackers
of digital worlds. In 1999 Sonya Roberts released her Female Skin Pack Excerpts, a series of female texture map for
the original Quake avatars, because the game designers neglected to provide a female protagonist. The eerie composition of a female skin on a muscular male ﬁgure embodied a
form of resistance to power.
Oppositional agency also ﬁnds its way through the voices
of “protesters” in virtual environment. Second Life users
have successfully pressed their developer Linden Labs to
alter the regulations in the Internet-based 3D virtual world
in various cases, most prominently two events in 2003: a
virtual tax revolt and agitation to allow people to retain IP
rights. It is useful to include such notions of agency because

The prevailing approach to user agency in interactive narrative systems treats the term as synonymous with users’
free will. A straightforward example of such a treatment
occurs in rhetoric of free spatial navigation, where a user is
allowed to explore digital environments at will, without being bound to visit locations in an order predeﬁned by author.
Such environments include map locations in video games
or text-based interactive ﬁction (IF) labyrinths. In describing such environments, critics often describe possibilities of
spatial exploration as cases of user agency. In articulating
different categories of interactive narrative, literary theorist
Marie-Laure Ryan captures this conception of agency in her
description of works providing what she terms “internalexploratory interactivity.” (2001) She describes these as systems where “the user exercises her agency by moving around
the ﬁctional world, picking up objects and looking at them,
viewing the action from different points of view, investigating a case, and trying to reconstitute events that have taken
place a long time ago.”

46

they relate user action to broader social, political, and cultural contexts both within and outside of the story worlds of
particular interactive narrative (and related) systems.

Situated Agency as an Expressive Tool for
Interactive Narrative Design

rather how the story is told. The use of agency is one of the
channels for digital authors to express themselves.
An equally expressive use is to limit or even temporarily eliminate user agency to convey a certain message, such
as the sense of conﬁnement or helplessness. Such strategy
nevertheless could be risky because historically the lack of
agency, as freewill in particular, has been associated with the
computational simplicity of the system or deﬁciency of the
design. The use of cut-scenes in video games is a good example. For decades the game industry has incorporated cutscenes where user freedom is temporarily suspended. Although scholars have pointed out the narrative utility of noninteractive cut-scenes, e.g. to advance plot and introduce
characters (Juul 2001), recent trends encourage designers to
incorporate player interaction in these cut-scenes regardless
of its content, for example in the introduction scene of Half
Life 2. It is sometimes easy to forget that the power of narrative systems is to provide units of meaningful work, not
mechanical interaction. (Bogost 2006) As we will argue in
the rest of the paper, computational techniques can be used
to tune user agency according to the story context.

In light of the above, our notion of agency needs to reconcile valuable insights provided by the various perspectives
on agency. Any unilateral deﬁnition of agency is inadequate.
An actor’s agency is mediated through situated rules and resources. Structuration theory addresses such negotiation between social structures and human actions. Her actions are
simultaneously constrained and enabled by the very social
structures that those actions serve to reinforce or reconﬁgure
(Giddens 1979; Ahearn 2001). As Ahearn proposes, agency
refers to the socio-culturally mediated capacity to act. In
digital environments, a user’s power to take meaningful actions is mediated through the structure provided by the computational system as well as the socially situated interpretation of actions rendered by the user. A system’s capacity to afford certain actions, impose certain constraints, and
reward certain behaviors clearly has great effect on user’s
agency. Even though games such as Shenmue are often accompanied by strong rhetoric that a player can do anything
they like and their actions will impact the gameplay, the system structure imposes a strong value system that shapes the
player’s agency, which, in turn, may reinforce or allow for
critique of that structure. User agency is thus situated materially in the system affordances and interpretively in the
context of use.
User agency also provides an aesthetic experience and
needs to be appropriate to its narrative context. A user’s
capacity to act and make distinction does not necessarily entail narrative consistency. Fortunately, the area of interactive
narrative is largely comprised of works that incorporate what
Murray (1998) calls the balance between “dramatic structure” and “player freedom”(Mateas & Stern 2002; Harrell
2006). Aspects of agency that have been commonly underexplored, however, include the ways that dynamically
changing the scope, nature, and degree of user agency during execution can serve the expressive goals of an interactive
narrative work. As a form of cultural production, interactive
narratives are created by human authors to convey meaning.
What is signiﬁcant sometimes is not what the story is, but

As argued above, context is indispensable to the understanding of user agency in interactive narrative works since it simultaneously constrains and enables the nature and interpretation of user actions. Computational systems play a central
role in establishing meaningful contexts in interactive narrative works, ranging from presenting hypermedia experiences
of many electronic literature works, such as the lauded textbased animation “Dakota” (Young-hae Chang Heavy Industries 2002), to selecting story beats in Mateas and Stern’s
interactive drama Fac¸ade. We refer to the capacity of the
computational system to modify the story world and provide
affordances for users actions as system agency (while understanding, following Callon and Latour, that this agency only
exists in conjunction with the role of human actors).
This paper is especially geared toward computational narrative systems that actively generate stories, story worlds,
and/or dynamically alter elements of narration, using AI
algorithmic and knowledge structuring approaches. Such
systems embody a wide range of types of system agency
that often fall into two categories, the second a subcategory
of the ﬁrst: 1) system agency as narrative generation and
constraint and 2) system agency as character control. The
ﬁrst type refers to the capacity of system as the “narrator”
and/or “author” to affect what the story is (narrative) and
how the story is told (narration) through control of events
and objects, and their presentation in the story world. Although computational narrative generation systems have traditionally focused on narrative presentation and structuring
of events such as in (Meehan 1976), recent work such as
(Montfort 2007) has emphasized more complex variation in
the narration of stories. The second type is system’s capacity
to control events through control of characters in the story,
often computationally encoding both internal states and external behaviors of characters. This second type of system
agency is the type often addressed in the ﬁeld area of believable agent design, and it is one that gives rise to the illusion

Absence of Agency
Another approach to agency is well articulated by Michel
Foucault’s work on power (Foucault 1977; 1978). An extreme reading of Foucault is that omnipresent impersonal
discourses so thoroughly pervade society that no room is left
for anything that might be regarded as agency, oppositional
or otherwise (Ahearn 2001). After playing some games produced by Ian Bogost’s company Persuasive Games, such as
Airport Insecurity and Disaffected!, it is difﬁcult not to question the existence of agency, both inside the games and out,
when a user is pushed to accomplish tasks either speciﬁed by
game mechanics or more pervasive commercial bureaucracy
and protocol in real life.

System Agency

47

• Agency Relationship: User actions and system actions operate in relation to one another and can vary in relative
magnitude and degree of dependency on one another (e.g.
an inverse relationship or independent operation).
• Agency Scope: Results of either user or system actions
may have immediate and local impact (e.g. turning a character left or right) or longer term and less immediately
apparent results (e.g. a series of actions may determine
narrative structure itself).
• Agency Dynamics: The relationship between possible
user and system actions, and their scopes, can vary dynamically during runtime.
• User Input Direction: The user may establish a pattern of
input that directs agency dynamics and/or agency scope.

UserInputDirection

AgencyDynamics
AgencyScope
AgencyRelationship

Figure 1: Dimensions of Agency; Arrows Indicate the Direction of Inﬂuence

Figure 1 illustrates how the dimensions of agency relate
to each other and how each dimension mediates the ones below it. The dimension of User Input Direction is separated
graphically because it directs the deployment of effects of
the levels below it, but is not itself constituted by the layers
below it. These layers below are meant to provide a vocabulary for more precisely describing such varying types of
agency, and how they can be manipulated toward expressive
effects.

of intentional agents acting in the story. As shown in the
next section, when both user and system compete or collaborate in control of the same characters, a new range of
opportunities are enabled to study and implement new ways
of designing agency toward expressive and aesthetic ends.
The notion of system agency leverages the discourse accompanying classic AI goals of building autonomous intelligent agents whose behaviors reveal human-like directedness
toward the world. The term “system agency” does not imply, however, that we ascribe intentionality to computational
systems themselves, or that a goal driving our framework is
a dream of full system autonomy. System agency is a result
of human interpretation in light of a set of situated social
circumstances, not as a property intrinsic to a computational
system itself. The term “system agency” provides shorthand
to describe human interpretation of properties of the system
behavior and capacity, speciﬁed by the story author and authoring system designer. More importantly, it suggests that
system agency needs to be considered in parallel to human
agency. We chose to name our construct describing the interaction between human and system agency agency play in
order to call attention to the inseparable nature of the two
concepts, as well as to sketch the possibility for skillful manipulation of the relationship and dynamics between them
toward expressive ends.

Agency Relationship
Agency relationship is the fundamental dimension of agency
play, and refers to a function, always situated in a particular context, describing the relative magnitude of and dependence relationship existing between:
• a set of actions allowed (by the system) to be executed by
a user
• a set of actions allowed to be executed by the system.
• user desire or need to perform actions,
• user sense of meaningful possible actions, and
• a range of possible user interpretations of actions.
We focus on the ﬁrst two aspects of the function above,
with the understanding that the latter three aspects determine
the expressive qualities of the agency relationship. Relative
magnitude refers to the relative degree of possible user actions to system imposed constraints, especially constraints
upon actions that would usually be enacted by the user in
the story world.
Dependence between player and system control over actions operate vary greatly.Primary models include cases
where user and system agency are 1) independent, 2) inversely dependent, 3) interdependent. Of course, standard
characters that are transparently controllable by a human
player and characters that are controlled solely by the system operate independently. Independent user agency in interactive narrative works usually refers to the ability of the
player to take meaningful actions in a story world. The
ability to cause a character to move, acquire artifacts, and
interact with other players or non-player characters (NPC)
reﬂects this sense of player agency. Yet, user agency can
also operate along dimensions outside of the story world
such as in-game camera control. The “meaningfulness” of
player actions most often arises from the degree to which a

Agency Play
Agency play engages multiple aspects of agency during runtime in expressive ways that reinforce the authorially intended meanings of the narrative. Agency play is not merely
strategically limiting user control. It focuses on leveraging
the relationship between the user and system in order to create a story world that is meaningful and engaging for users
to participate in. Incorporation of a range of agency effects
in interactive narrative is similar to the step that ﬁlm makers took last century when they discovered that camera angle, framing, and take length were all effective storytelling
mechanisms, not just coincidental properties of the medium.
This section deﬁnes what we see as promising dimensions of
expressive use of agency and provides illustrative examples.
Accordingly, we offer the following layers of agency play,
each of which can be used expressively to convey meaning:

48

player’s actions express intentionality, or aboutness, in the
story world, and the ability of player determined actions to
affect the world and progress in a narrative. Thus, control
over character actions that do not have any signiﬁcant narrative effect are commonly described as providing the player
with a low degree of agency. Simultaneously, moving a camera in a proper way may reveal to the player a necessary
object in the game world for progressing the narrative, an
example in which a non-story world action provides a meaningful story world result. As we have argued above, the notion of meaningful agency relies upon situated construal of
possible user actions.
Independent system agency can refer to narration of
the system as being capable of autonomously carrying out
human-like actions. For example, Rafael Perez’s system
MEXICA has been described as an automatic storytelling
system(P´erez y P´erez & Aliseda 2006). MEXICA itself exhibits system agency by doing the “telling.”
The IMPROV system by Ken Perlin and Athomas Goldberg, which was developed to allow for the scripting of semiautonomous characters that expressed their own behaviordriven goals and states, provides a good case with which to
describe inverse dependence (Perlin & Goldberg 1996). For
example, one could say that the more an Improv-based character can take action in a story world without direction of a
player, the more system agency and less player agency is exhibited. The 2005 strategy game Civilization IV, on the other
hand, represents a different correlation. When the agency of
the player increases in the game as she or he gains more resources (money, weapon, technology, etc), so does agency of
the system because it controls more NPCs with increased capability, and the system must coordinate a more complicated
set of game world events at large. This represents a type
of interdependence. Likewise, a system could implement a
subset of playable characters that are semi-autonomous, requiring only high level direction from a player. In this case
the control of character action also displays an interdependent relationship. All three types of dependency articulated
above are meant only to sketch useful points along a range
of possibilities, rather than to exhaustively list every possible type of dependence between user and system control of
situated action.

ever, the variability in the generated output in terms of both
media elements invoked and rhetorical model is great. The
contrast, in this case, between low local player agency and
high global player agency can be read as a commentary on
pervasive power of ideologies.

Agency Dynamics
The nature of a given agency relationship and the scope of
agency impact can vary over time. In this case, we say that
there is a play of agency dynamics. If these dynamics are
orchestrated in order to express a theme such as the increasing emotional maturity of a character, then agency play has
become an expressive resource varying according to runtime
aesthetic dictates. Stories that contain ﬁxed level of agency
relationship and agency scope throughout runtime, which
could be a conscious and expressive design decision in its
own right, have static agency dynamics.
One space to explore the dynamics between player agency
and system agency is through semi-autonomous player characters (SPCs). In the domains of interactive narrative and
gaming, characters are often categorized as PCs or NPCs.
PCs are often presented as avatars entirely controlled by
players, whereas NPCs embrace system autonomy and are
not usually subject to player command. Although most
characters fall into one or the other category, some incorporate traits of both. For instance, some PCs may convey
their impatience by foot-tapping or may smile when receiving power-ups. Our current work (Zhu & Harrell 2008b;
2008a) explores how to algorithmically adjust agency dynamics in SPCs with a goal to express our view of the relationship between human and machines(AI). In the Memory,
Reverie Machine project (formerly called the Daydreaming
Machine)that is described in the next section, both the relationship between player and system agency and their respective scope level changes as required by the story and
character development over time.

User Input Direction
All the above levels of agency can be directed by user input.
For example, in Pac-Man 2: The New Adventures the player
does not directly control the PC, but can direct his attention
toward certain objects or tasks (which the character sometimes refuses). This is used expressively to provide a sense
of personality to the PC, at the same time as providing a
necessary constraint on possible actions. In Terminal Time,
described above, the player interaction to determine the slant
(e.g. feminist or technocentric) is minimal, the audience collectively answers a set of multiple choice questions. However, the user input is what offers players the strong sense of
global agency in the piece.
The model presented above is our preliminary effort to
carefully present a model of agency that includes often overlooked agency phenomena, towards the development of theory for design of interactive narrative systems. The account
of all four dimensions above certainly is not comprehensive,
and the examples do not cover the entire area of expressive
possibilities. Each is an area ripe for further exploration.
Our modest goal here is to present a new approach to con-

Agency Scope
The concept of agency scope describes the impact and narrative focus of user and system actions, ranging from immediate and local impact, such as spatial navigation ability,
to less immediately apparent but more global results, such
as shaping the narrative structure itself. Either side of the
agency scope spectrum can be used effectively to convey
meanings in addition to the actual narrative.
We have already seen how Shadow of the Colossus deploys a high degree of local player agency with a low degree
of global player agency to render the sense of fate and helplessness. An opposite practice can be found in the interactive narrative documentary Terminal Time (Mateas 2002). In
this work, users only have very low local agency through the
one-dimensional control mechanism (volume of the clapping sound) with very few multiple choice questions. How-

49

to the conceptual integration of multiple concepts according
to a set of cognitively-inspired optimality principles. In this
case, modiﬁer-noun phrases, some of the simplest indicators
of conceptual blends, are the ﬁnal result of an underlying
process that is semantic, not lexical.
The scope of impact of user actions, besides their immediate consequences and longer-range effects on the current
story world, can also manifest itself through the emotional
tone of the blends and selection of particular memories
episodes, both determined by the emotional state of SPC.
In the sample output, the user directed action to “punch” the
door open does not only allow the SPC to enter the room
(local agency), or only inform later interaction related to his
experience in the room (global) via a history of actions, but
also moves the SPC’s emotion state into “anger” (currently
implemented using a simple ﬁnite state machine), which inﬂuences the emotional tone of blends and memories in both
immediately and in the longer term future. The “emotional
state” of SPC may also inﬂuence the dynamics of the agency
relationship. If the SPCs “anger” state value is very high,
for instance, he may favor system agency more by refusing
to carry on user’s command, or performing the action petulantly or aggressively.
Although the system is capable of generating highly variable output, certain moments in the stories are designed to
have low global agency in order to achieve expressive goals.
For instance, in another short narrative sequence of MRM
output, the protagonist SPC is a cleaning robot working in a
kitchen. The beginning of the narrative offers a great variety
of tasks to the SPC, and user choice of action results detailed
description of the action’s results. However, as the story
continues, and the character gains more domestic work experience in the story world, both the number of options and
degree of detail decrease. In one particular moment, the user
has to repeatedly choose between “wiping” a dish and “rubbing” a dish, two closely related actions, yet the outcome
remains unchangeable. The aesthetic choice of emphasizing (limited) local agency over (even more) limited global
agency in this particular movement of the narrative is set
to contrast with previously encountered narrative sequences
that incorporated a higher magnitude of user agency relative
to system agency, and therefore conveys the emotion state of
the character: boredom with a repetitive daily job, as well as
a sense of conﬁnement and powerlessness. The sundry moment is meant to evoke a sense of pathos and meaninglessness while completing a neverending list of sundry chores.
These dimensions of agency play are all guided by user
input direction, i.e. they are mediated by patterns of user
input. A repeated series of user choices reinforces the SPCs
emotional state and patterns of behavior thus impact the system’s style of narration, the character’s action performed, the
short and long term impact of actions, and dynamic changes
in the degree of user control versus system control.

sidering the role of agency in interactive narrative works and
to provide vocabulary for the discussion.

Case Study: Memory, Reverie Machine
Our current work on the interactive narrative system the
Memory, Reverie Machine can be used to illustrate the application of our model of agency play. MRM generates stories of an SPC who oscillates between an objective world of
events, objects, and actors (Turner 1996), and an affectivelytinted, subjective world of dispositions, memories, reveries,
and daydreams. The cognitive science theory of conceptual
blending(Fauconnier 2001) is used to integrate concepts associated with the two worlds using the Alloy algorithm for
conceptual blending from Harrell’s GRIOT system (Harrell
2007). Narrative structuring and interaction is also mediated
using the GRIOT system, with a few extensions technically
detailed in (Zhu & Harrell 2008a), which also describes the
goals and theoretical framework of MRM at more length.
This section focuses on MRM’s deployment of agency
play through an illustrative sample output in Figure 2. Although our implementation work is at a relatively early
stage, the sample nevertheless provides material for theoretical analysis and a blueprint for a more generative system
with each of its narrative components being expanded and
generated algorithmically.
MRM explores the relationship between user and system
agency, both of which impact the SPC’s behaviors in a inversely dependent relationship. More speciﬁcally, the contrast between them is externalized as the proportions of:
• protagonist actions selected by a user / protagonist actions
selected by the system
• the main narrative conveying story world events and results of user selected actions/ narration of memories,
reveries and daydreams
• template-based objective description of SPC action / subjective description and affective disposition, generated by
the Alloy conceptual blending algorithm.
In the case of Figure 2, the initial action is selected by
the user, whereas memories, reveries and daydreams are determined by the system, triggered by objects that appear in
the narrative, and are not directly controllable to the user.
The system retrieves these “mental activities” of the SPC
indirectly based on user’s interaction(s), such as the artifacts/characters that she chooses to interact with, and/or dispositions with which actions are performed (e.g. “punch”
vs. “open gently”). The most intriguing negotiation between system and user, however, occurs where the two are
conﬂated through blends. Blended descriptions are created
from mixing properties of “objective” elements directly or
indirectly chosen by the user (e.g. events, objects, and actors) and affective dispositions of the SPC algorithmically
determined by the system. For example in the sample output, logical axioms selected from an ontology describing the
concept “mother” are blended with axioms describing affective concept “anger,” into a “disturbingly familiar” mother.
It is important to be clear that blending here is not the mere
concatenation of words to form compound phrases. It refers

Conclusion and Future Work
Agency play carries with it signiﬁcant narrative risks. User
expectation for transparent control over user characters can
be violated. Dynamic agency may cause agents to seem unpredictable in response to user direction. Under such cir-

50

User input contributes
to the determination
of Ales' emotional
state of "anger"

Conceptual blend between domain "room"
and "anger", reinforced
by user input "punch"

Conceptual blend between domain "mother"
and existing emotion
state"anger"

(ales stopped, computed, and moved again to
[knock/open/open_gently/punch/open_carelessly] the door ...)
> PUNCH
(The door creaked into an entrance.)
(the funny noise reminds him of)
(the hospitals, the junkyards, he went to frequently)
(, which was so unpleasant that he always avoided it ever since,
ohhh, the same noise.)
(he paused a bit before he walked in.)
(the bothersome light room looked somewhat like the room he
was born.)
(his disturbingly familiar mother probably had left him quite
early.)
(most of his knowledge about her came more from)
(the engineer pointing to the women in pictures)
(his memories of experiences.)
(the things she liked to wear, the way she smiled.)

Memory text
triggered by
the keyword
"creaked"

Memory text
triggered by the
keyword "born"

Figure 2: Preliminary Sample Output from Memory, Reverie Machine
works. We believe that riveting new artistic possibilities will
arise from interactive narrative works in which agency play
will allow for salient new possibilities of emergent meaning
and reﬂection on our human conditions.

cumstances user direction may seem less meaningful if it
is often seemingly ignored by the system. Users may need
indication of exactly when their agency has given way to
system agency, and why. Yet, we position agency play as a
promising expressive tool for interactive narrative. This is
because the ﬁeld of interactive narrative has matured to the
stage that users are accustomed to many conventions of interaction and user agency. Self-reﬂexive, challenging, and
provocative play with such conventions can yield new narrative directions.

References
Abu-Lughod, L. 1990. The romance of resistance: Tracing
transformations of power through bedouin women. American Ethnologist 17(1):41–55.
Ahearn, L. M. 2001. Language and agency. Annual Review
of Anthropology 30:109–137.
Aylett, R., and Louchart, S. —2003—. Towards a narrative
theory for virtual reality. Virtual Reality 7(1):2–9.
Bogost, I. 2006. Unit Operations. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Cavazza, M.; Charles, F.; and Mead, S. J. —2001—. Characters in search of an author: Ai-based virtual storytelling.
In Virtual Storytelling Using Virtual Reality Technologies
for Storytelling. Berlin / Heidelberg: Springer. 145–154.
Davidson, D. 2001. Agency. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 43–62.
Fauconnier, G. 2001. Conceptual blending and analogy.
In Gentner, D.; Holyoak, K. J.; and Kokino, B. N., eds.,
The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Foucault, M. 1977. Discipline and Punish. New York:
Pantheon.
Foucault, M. 1978. The History of Sexuality, Vol. I: An
Introduction, volume 1. New York: Pantheon.
Giddens, A. 1979. Central Problems in Social Theory:
Action, Structure and Contradiction in Social Analysis.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Goguen, J.
2003.
Theories of technology and
science course notes section 6.
http://wwwcse.ucsd.edu/ goguen/courses/275/s6.html.
Harrell, D. F. 2006. Walking blues changes undersea:
Imaginative narrative in interactive poetry generation with

User agency is often seen as the crucial distinction between interactive narratives and more “conventional” narratives. User agency is not a monolithic phenomenon, however, and it can be harnessed to support story content and
narration. Rather than viewing the goal of interactive narrative works as the maintenance of a coherent story in light
of the capricious will of the user, our future exploration includes developing constraints that change over time to control users’ abilities to take free action, to affect overarching
narratives, and to direct the emotions and behavior of virtual characters. Any narrative thematically engaging control, fate, self-determination, and much more could deploy
agency play as a metaphor for the relevant theme.
Future work consists of further reﬁning our preliminary
model of agency play and expanding the new narrative components of MRM to be more generative. MRM is designed,
in part, for inquiry into what we see as especially promising
avenues for research into agency play. As in (Zhu & Harrell 2008a), technical tools can be created to afford agency
play in digital narratives. We ﬁnd that a theoretical account
of narration of intentionality is necessary for this endeavor
and that explicitly representing and manipulating semantic
content of media (e.g. generating metaphors in text, modular graphics, or multimedia via conceptual blending (Harrell
2007)) will provide the technical framework necessary for
implementing various readings of agency and intentionality within narrative systems. This paper reﬂects our ﬁrst attempt at articulating dynamic possibilities for engaging the
interplay of user and system agency in interactive narrative

51

Zhu, J., and Harrell, D. F. 2008a. Daydreaming with intention: Scalable blending-based imagining and agency in
generative interactive narrative. In Proceedings of AAAI
2008 Spring Symposium on Creative Intelligent Systems,
156–162. AAAI Press.
Zhu, J., and Harrell, D. F. 2008b. Narrating artiﬁcial daydreams, memories, reveries: Toward scalable intentionality
in expressive artiﬁcial intelligence practice. In Electronic
Literature Organization Conference.

the griot system. In AAAI 2006 Workshop in Computational Aesthetics: Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approaches to
Happiness and Beauty. Boston, MA: AAAI Press.
Harrell, D. F. 2007. Theory and Technology for Computational Narrative: An Approach to Generative and Interactive Narrative with Bases in Algebraic Semiotics and Cognitive Linguistics. Dissertation, University of California,
San Diego.
Juul, J. 2001. Games telling stories? Game Studies 1(1).
Latour, B. 1996. Aramis, or the Love of Technology. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Louchart, S., and Aylett, R. —2003—. Solving the narrative paradox in ves - lessons from rpgs. In Rist, T.; Aylett,
R.; Ballin, D.; and Rickel, J., eds., Intelligent Virtual
Agents: 4th International Workshop, 244–248. Springer.
LucasArts. 2003. Star wars: Knights of the old republic
(xbox).
Mateas, M., and Stern, A. 2002. A behavior language
for story-based believable agents. IEEE Intelligent Systems
17(4):39–47.
Mateas, M. 2002. Interactive Drama, Art, and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. Ph.D. Dissertation, CMU.
Meehan, J. 1976. The Metanovel: Writing Stories by Computer. Ph.d., Yale University.
Montfort, N. 2007. Ordering events in interactive ﬁction
narratives on intelligent narrative technologies. In AAAI
2007 Fall Symposium on Intelligent Narrative Technologies, 87–94. AAAI Press.
Murray, J. H. 1998. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future
of Narrative in Cyberspace. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
P´erez y P´erez, R., and Aliseda, A. 2006. The role of
abduction in automatic storytelling. In Proceedings of
the AAAI workshop in Computational Aesthetics, 53–60.
AAAI Press.
Perlin, K., and Goldberg, A. 1996. Improv: a system
for scripting interactive actors in virtual worlds. Computer
Graphics 29(3).
Pickering, A. 1995. The Mangle of Practice. University of
Chicago Press.
Ryan, M.-L. 2001. Beyond myth and metaphor: The case
of narrative in digital media. Game Studies 1(1).
Sega. 2000. Shenmue.
Segal, J. M. 1991. Agency and Alienation: A Theory of
Human Presence. Lanham MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Sony Computer Entertainment. 2005. Shadow of the colossus (playstation 2).
Turner, M. 1996. The Literary Mind: The Origins of
Thought and Language. New York; Oxford: Oxford UP.
Weyhrauch, P. 1997. Guiding Interactive Drama. Ph.D.
Dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University.
Young-hae Chang Heavy Industries. 2002. Dakota.
Young, R. M. 2007. Story and discourse: A bipartite model
of narrative generation in virtual worlds. Interaction Studies 8(2):177–208.

52

